.\" voidwatch(1) — terminal space observatory manual page
.\" Generated 2026-05-08
.TH VOIDWATCH 1 "2026-05-08" "voidwatch 1.0.0" "Voidwatch"
.SH NAME
voidwatch \- terminal space observatory: N-body sandbox + real-ephemeris planetarium with hand-built SGP4
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B voidwatch
[\fB\-\-astro\fR]
[\fB\-\-lat\fR \fIDEG\fR \fB\-\-lon\fR \fIDEG\fR]
[\fB\-\-no\-audio\fR | \fB\-\-device\fR \fINAME\fR]
[\fB\-\-theme\fR \fIPATH\fR]
[\fB\-\-config\fR \fIPATH\fR]
.PP
.B voidwatch
.B \-\-tonight
| \fB\-\-print\-state\fR [\fB\-\-json\fR]
| \fB\-\-next\fR \fIBODY\fR
| \fB\-\-year\fR \fIYYYY\fR
| \fB\-\-snapshot\fR [\fICOLS ROWS\fR]
| \fB\-\-validate\fR
[\fB\-\-at\fR \fIISODATE\fR]
[\fB\-\-lat\fR \fIDEG\fR \fB\-\-lon\fR \fIDEG\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B voidwatch
is a terminal space observatory rendered through a sub-pixel Braille
framebuffer with phosphorescent decay. Two operating modes share one
rendering pipeline:
.PP
.B Sandbox
(default) is a phosphorescent N-body simulation: a star, five planets,
a neutron-star companion, a black hole, and a violet nebula core
drifting on stable symplectic-Euler orbits. Perlin-noise nebulae,
parallax starfield, fixed-arena particle FX, audio-reactive supernovae
on bass spikes.
.PP
.B Astro
mode (\fB\-\-astro\fR) is a real-ephemeris planetarium: 8870 HYG
catalogue stars, 88 IAU constellations, Sun + Moon + 8 planets
(Meeus low-precision), Milky Way band, lunar phases, solar/lunar
eclipses, 9 annual meteor showers, 6 perennial comets and 5 minor
planets propagated two-body Keplerian, 30 named deep-sky objects
(Messier + bright NGC), 4 bundled near-Earth satellites (ISS, Hubble,
NOAA 19, CSS Tianhe) propagated through a hand-built SGP4 validated
to ~7 nanometres against Vallado's published verification vectors,
optional aurora shimmer, atmospheric refraction (Bennett 1982) and
extinction (Kasten-Young 1989), twilight horizon glow.
.PP
A heliocentric "above the ecliptic" view is available via the
\fBm\fR key; full orbital traces, Earth visible, sqrt-compressed scale.
.PP
Headless modes
.RB ( \-\-tonight ", " \-\-print\-state ", " \-\-next ", " \-\-year ", "
.B \-\-snapshot ", " \-\-validate )
bypass terminal init, audio capture, and the render loop entirely.
Pure compute + print + exit. JSON output suitable for piping into
.BR jq (1).
.SH COMMANDS
This is a single-binary CLI; modes are selected via flags rather than
sub-commands. The flags below are grouped by purpose.
.SS Run modes
.TP
.B (none)
Sandbox mode. N-body sim with phosphorescent trails, Perlin nebula
wash, particle FX, audio-reactive supernovae on bass transients.
.TP
.B \-\-astro
Real-ephemeris planetarium mode. All-sky azimuthal-equidistant
projection from zenith by default; press \fBm\fR for heliocentric.
.SS Observer
.TP
.B \-\-lat \fIDEG\fR
Observer latitude (north positive). Falls back to
\fI~/.config/voidwatch/location.conf\fR, then
\fB$VOIDWATCH_LAT\fR, then \fI(0,0)\fR.
.TP
.B \-\-lon \fIDEG\fR
Observer longitude (east positive). Same precedence.
.SS Audio
.TP
.B \-\-no\-audio
Skip ALSA capture entirely. Sandbox audio reactivity collapses to
identity. Falls back to a periodic supernova every 90 s for visual
pacing.
.TP
.B \-\-device \fINAME\fR
Pick an ALSA PCM source (e.g. "default", "pulse", or a specific
hardware name). Overrides
.BR $VOIDWATCH_AUDIO_DEVICE .
.TP
.B \-\-list\-devices
Print every ALSA capture source with a "(monitor)" tag on sink
monitors and exit.
.SS Configuration
.TP
.B \-\-theme \fIPATH\fR
Load a key=value palette \fI.conf\fR (overrides
\fI~/.config/voidwatch/theme.conf\fR).
.TP
.B \-\-config \fIPATH\fR
Load a TOML/INI runtime config (overrides
\fI~/.config/voidwatch/config.toml\fR).
.SS Headless / one-shot
.TP
.B \-\-tonight
Text summary of what's worth watching tonight: Sun/Moon, planets,
active meteor shower, asteroids/comets brighter than the configured
cutoffs.
.TP
.B \-\-print\-state " [" \-\-json ]
Full ephemeris + comets + asteroids + bundled satellites. Plain text
columns; with \fB\-\-json\fR, structured JSON for piping into
.BR jq (1).
.TP
.B \-\-next \fIBODY\fR
Find the next rise time for a planet, comet, asteroid, or DSO.
Searches up to 30 days forward; prints local time and alt/az.
.TP
.B \-\-year \fIYYYY\fR
Annual almanac for the given Gregorian year. Eclipses,
planet-planet conjunctions, Moon close passes, shower peaks,
greatest elongations, equinoxes/solstices, sorted chronologically.
.TP
.B \-\-snapshot " [" \fICOLS ROWS\fR ]
Render one astro frame to stdout (ANSI truecolor + Braille) and exit.
Default 80×40. Useful for status-bar refreshers and saved frames.
.TP
.B \-\-validate
Run the internal sanity tests against Meeus's published worked
examples and JPL Horizons references. Prints PASS/FAIL with delta
in arcminutes for each check. Returns 0 if every test passed, 1 if
any failed.
.TP
.B \-\-at \fIYYYY\-MM\-DD[Thh:mm:ss]\fR
Seed the virtual clock at the given moment. Works with
\fB\-\-astro\fR (live mode opens at that time, \fB,\fR/\fB.\fR/\fB+\fR/
\fB-\fR scrub from there) and with all of the headless flags above
(snapshot a known eclipse, replay an old conjunction, etc.).
.SS Misc
.TP
.B \-V ", " \-\-version
Print version and exit.
.TP
.B \-h ", " \-\-help
Show usage and exit.
.SH KEYS
Both modes:
.PP
.RS
.nf
q / Esc    quit
h          toggle HUD
?          help overlay
.fi
.RE
.PP
Astro mode (\fB\-\-astro\fR):
.PP
.RS
.nf
+ / -      time speed × 10  (faster / slower)
0          reset speed + scrub
, / .      scrub time -1h / +1h
j          jump to next event (eclipse / conjunction / shower)
/          search by name; auto-tracks the matched body
m          toggle geo / helio view
s          toggle decorative star backdrop
g          toggle alt-az grid
l          toggle constellation lines
d          toggle deep-sky objects (M31, M42, ...)
a          toggle aurora
i          toggle satellites (ISS, HST, NOAA 19, CSS)
t          toggle planet trails
T          toggle track mode (cursor follows nearest body)
c          toggle object cursor (then hjkl, Esc)
click      mouse-click to move cursor + arm track on a body
.fi
.RE
.SH SATELLITES
voidwatch ships a hand-built SGP4 propagator (Hoots & Roehrich 1980;
Vallado, Crawford, Hujsak & Kelso 2006), validated against the
published \fBtcppver.out\fR test vectors to ~7 nanometre position
agreement at 4320 minutes of propagation. Output frame is TEME ECI;
look angles use a WGS-72 geodetic-to-ECEF transform with polar motion
zero (visual-grade, not strict-grade).
.PP
The bundled near-Earth catalog (ISS, Hubble, NOAA 19, Tiangong/CSS)
is fetched from CelesTrak and pasted into the binary. TLEs decay
quickly; the staleness policy is:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
\fB≤ 7 days\fR: full brightness.
.IP \(bu 2
\fB7 < age ≤ 14 days\fR: dim 50%.
.IP \(bu 2
\fB14 < age ≤ 30 days\fR: hidden from render; JSON marks
\fBstale: true\fR.
.IP \(bu 2
\fBage > 30 days\fR: refused; \fBvalid: false\fR.
.RE
.PP
Deep-space TLEs (period ≥ 225 minutes — GEO, Molniya, etc.) return
\fBSAT_DEEP_SPACE\fR from
.B satellite_model_init
and never silently produce wrong answers.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.config/voidwatch/theme.conf
Palette file. Key = #RRGGBB lines; auto-loaded.
.TP
.I ~/.config/voidwatch/config.toml
Runtime config (visual / astro / sandbox sections); auto-loaded.
.TP
.I ~/.config/voidwatch/location.conf
Observer lat/lon (\fBlat = ...\fR, \fBlon = ...\fR).
.TP
.I ~/.config/wallust/templates/voidwatch.conf
Optional wallust template; \fBwset\fR regenerates the theme.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B VOIDWATCH_LAT, VOIDWATCH_LON
Observer location fallback when CLI flags and config file are absent.
.TP
.B VOIDWATCH_AUDIO_DEVICE
ALSA PCM source name. Overridden by \fB\-\-device\fR.
.TP
.B PULSE_SOURCE
Used by ALSA's PulseAudio plugin when
.B VOIDWATCH_AUDIO_DEVICE=pulse
to pick a specific PulseAudio source (typically a sink monitor for
desktop-audio reactivity).
.SH EXAMPLES
.nf
voidwatch                                # sandbox
voidwatch --astro                        # planetarium
voidwatch --astro --no-audio             # skip ALSA entirely

voidwatch --tonight                      # what's up?
voidwatch --print-state --json | jq .planets
voidwatch --next mars                    # next rise
voidwatch --year 2026 | grep -i eclipse  # 2026 eclipses
voidwatch --validate                     # sanity tests vs JPL/Meeus

# Halley's perihelion 2061:
voidwatch --astro --at 2061-07-28T00:00:00

# Snapshot the current ISS pass to a file:
voidwatch --snapshot 200 50 --astro \\
    --at 2026-05-08T10:00:00 \\
    --lat 32.78 --lon -79.93 > frame.ans
.fi
.SH AUDIO ROUTING
On PipeWire systems voidwatch's \fBdefault\fR ALSA device is the
microphone. To react to desktop audio (Spotify, browser, etc.):
.PP
.RS
.nf
PULSE_SOURCE=$(pactl list short sources | awk '/monitor/{print $2; exit}') \\
VOIDWATCH_AUDIO_DEVICE=pulse \\
voidwatch
.fi
.RE
.PP
Or run voidwatch and use \fBpavucontrol\fR's Recording tab to switch
its source to the sink monitor.
.SH EXIT STATUS
0 on clean exit (q / Esc / Ctrl-C, or successful headless run).
1 on rendering / runtime failure or
.B \-\-validate
test failure.
2 on argument parse failure.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR jq (1),
.BR wallust (1),
.BR pavucontrol (1),
.BR ncspot (1).
.PP
References:
Hoots & Roehrich,
.I Spacetrack Report No. 3
(NORAD/USAF, 1980);
Vallado, Crawford, Hujsak & Kelso,
.I Revisiting Spacetrack Report #3
(AIAA 2006-6753);
Meeus,
.I Astronomical Algorithms
(Willmann-Bell, 2e, 1998).
.PP
Project: https://codeberg.org/cdubz/voidwatch
.SH AUTHOR
Dr. Baklava (cdubz) \(em https://codeberg.org/cdubz
